[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: What
is consciousness?
Is it located in the
center of our brain,
or is it non-local and outside
of our brains in some type
of immeasurable field?
Can it be shared?
Can it be tested?
These are the questions
that scientists
have debated about for hundreds,
maybe even thousands of years.
Joining me is Dr.
Eben Alexander.
He is a New York
Times bestselling
author of "Proof of Heaven,"
"The Map of Heaven,"
and he shares his
unique insights
into the true nature
of consciousness
based on his experience
as a neurosurgeon
and surviving a life-threatening
illness and a subsequent coma.
Welcome.
Thank you for joining me.
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Well,
Lisa, it's great to be here.
Thanks for having me.
>>LISA: So many
incredible stories
that you have shared with me
before on the Gaia shows here.
But I want to hear just a
little bit about your story
of your experience in the coma.
First of all, how
did you get there?
>>EBEN: Well, I had spent
54 years of my life honing
a scientific worldview.
I was a neurosurgeon, teaching
at Harvard Medical School.
And then on November 10,
2008, 4:30 in the morning,
developed severe back
pain, severe headache,
soon thereafter seizures,
was driven deep into coma.
And it turns out that my
doctors who accepted me
into the emergency room
figured out very quickly
that I had a
life-threatening case
of bacterial meningoencephalitis
or very profound meningitis,
involving the
depths of the brain.
And so in fact, the
interesting thing
is that my entire scientific
worldview for coma
would predict that
somebody that ill,
especially with the
documented evidence
to damage to my neocortex,
should have had no experience
whatsoever.
And yet, what had unfolded over
the next seven days of my coma
was a profound spiritual
journey into ultra-real realms,
far more real than this one,
that I came back to the world
trying to explain,
initially thinking
it had to have been
a vast hallucination.
But then the more I
learned about my illness,
and as my brain recovered--
because when I first came back
from coma, my brain
was so wrecked
I didn't even recognize
loved ones at the bedside.
>>LISA: Mm.
You shouldn't have
even survived that.
>>EBEN: Well, the
doctors had predicted
I had a 10% chance of
survival early in the week
but was down to a 2%
chance of survival
at the end of the week, but
with no chance of recovery.
And any physician who
reviews these medical records
realizes this was a devastating
case of bacterial meningitis.
My doctors to this
day would tell you
that the biggest miracle
is that I survived
and had a complete recovery.
I mean, that pretty
much is unprecedented.
To me, the miracle concerns
what I witnessed deep in coma
when my doctors
had evidence based
on my neurologic exams,
my scans and lab values,
that the human part
of my brain was not
capable of producing
any hallucination, drug
effect, confabulation,
hallucination, what have you.
And that is what I've spent
the last 10 years of my life
as a scientist investigating.
>>LISA: So as a
scientist beforehand,
you were in people's brains.
You were inside as a
neurosurgeon operating
in their brains.
Did you ever put together
afterwards, years later,
that this would be an
experience that you
would have gone through?
And going through the inner
workings of the brain,
what could have happened to you?
Meningitis attacking
the neocortex--
>>EBEN: It's perfect.
>>LISA: Devastating.
>>EBEN: But it was perfect.
It was a gift.
>>LISA: Why do you say--
>>EBEN: I mean,
what I've learned
is that near-death
experiences are always
very crucial to the soul
that's undergoing it.
That's why they exist.
Now, scientists who study
near-death experiences
by the thousands will
tell you that there
are many commonalities.
In fact, the commonalities
point to this
being a very real realm.
Just because it's
not a material realm
doesn't mean it's
not absolutely real.
And yet the stories are
always a little bit different
because they are tailored
to the individual.
And in looking back
on it, especially
with 10 years of study,
of consciousness,
between that coma
and now, I realized
that it was really a
perfect journey for me,
as someone who was
very open-minded
as a neuroscientist, needing to
know much more about the nature
of consciousness.
Up until my coma,
I believed fully
the conventional
scientific model
of what's known as physicalism,
or reductive materialism.
It's basically the idea that
only the physical world exists.
So if we study that
physical world or material
world as closely as we can, we
can determine how it all works.
And that includes, of
course, the supposition
that if only the
physical exists and we
know there's a relationship
between brain and mind or brain
and consciousness, that
somehow the brain must
be creating consciousness.
And it turns out that
that is not true.
And that is where our modern
science is so befuddled.
That's where neuroscience has
actually reached an impasse
and so has quantum physics.
The deep study of the
nature of matter around us.
And it's because quantum
physics gets right
into the heart of the
mind-brain connection.
But there's a revolution going
on in the scientific world
today about exactly
that, about all
of the evidence in neuroscience
and philosophy of mind,
that the brain is not the
creator of consciousness
at all, that it's more of
a filter or reducing valve,
but that consciousness
is primordial.
So, in fact, we're conscious
in spite of the brain.
And that is something
that we come
to know very fully
when we die, when
the physical brain and
body come to an end
and we realize our conscious
awareness doesn't disappear
into nothingness, which is what
the materialist model would
put out, but in fact is
expanded tremendously.
And that's what
near-death experiences
have been telling us
for thousands of years,
across all continents
and belief systems.
>>LISA: Which is so interesting.
How many people come
up to you and say,
that happened to me too?
>>EBEN: Oh, I would
say it happens a lot.
Now, the interesting thing
is, I often still give talks
to very naive audiences.
They've never heard of
NDEs, but they show up
at these presentations I give.
But the thing that's so
fascinating is afterwards,
I'll have a certain group of
people come up to me and say--
and often they'll
start by saying,
I never told anybody
this before but.
And often in that
setting they'll
share a near-death
experience, very profound,
that might have happened
50 or 60 years earlier,
and yet they remember
it as clearly
as if it happened yesterday.
>>LISA: Why?
>>EBEN: These are not
imaginary or hallucinatory.
There have been
scientific studies
on the nature of
memories of NDEs,
and they're far more
profound and resilient
and stable as memories
than pretty much the memory
of anything else that
ever happens in our life.
They're very, very
stable and rich.
>>LISA: Delible.
>>EBEN: And people often say
they're too real to be real.
Those were the words I used
to my oldest son, Eben IV.
When I was out of the
hospital two days,
he came home for
Thanksgiving back in 2008
and gave me a big hug.
And he told me later
it was like there
was a light shining within
me, like I was far more
present than I had ever been.
And I said, it was way too
real to be real, which to me
at that time meant it had
to be a vast hallucination.
But I still was
recovering all my memory
of neuroscience and
everything that took
two months to come back to me.
>>LISA: And also because
you don't remember it--
and that's one of the
biggest challenges is,
I didn't remember
mine until I started--
I was interviewing Raymond
Moody, and I did research.
And I saw these characteristics
of indelible memory
and as if it just happened
yesterday and immediate recall.
And it changes
your life purpose.
That's a big characteristic,
and your life purpose completely
changed.
>>EBEN: Here we see
things with our eyes,
we hear with our ears.
In those realms,
you see everything.
By identity, you become one with
other beings, other souls that
are on this journey as your way
of knowing and understanding
them.
And it's often said that these
experiences are ineffable.
They're indescribable.
You cannot use human language to
fully express them because they
are so extraordinary.
And that's something that
we talk about in our book
"Living in a Mindful Universe,"
because it's really all about--
the fact is, you don't have
to be smote down by meningitis
to know everything
I know about this.
As a conscious,
sentient being, going
within a practice of
centering prayer or meditation
can be a very powerful
tool to coming
to know the eternity
of your soul
long before you leave
the physical body.
>>LISA: It really makes
you think about memory.
So you write about in the book--
and this is the scientific part
of this--
when I was very young, I asked
my dad who is a scientist,
where is memory
located in the brain?
And I would love to
know your answer.
>>EBEN: Well, the
interesting answer
is it is not localized
in the brain.
For example, a lot of the
evidence that I now put out
that we discuss in "Living
in a Mindful Universe"
has to do with reincarnation.
Now, although most materialist
scientists will say, well, wait
a minute, brain
creates consciousness,
so you can't have reincarnation.
There's no way for any sense
of memory to go from one life
to the next.
Well, that is not true.
The scientific evidence out
of University of Virginia,
work over more
than five decades,
beginning with Dr. Ian
Stevenson, a very respected
psychiatrist, who studied past
life memories in children,
that he fully expected to
basically debunk or explain
as a typical
materialist scientist.
But then he found there
are these cases where
he couldn't do that.
>>LISA: It wasn't imagination?
>>EBEN: It was not imagination.
And they would track
these cases down.
They'd pay attention
to children,
because children are much
less likely to be influenced
and have other
sources of information
that they could try and
use to deceive people.
And so-- in the
UVA database, they
have more than 2,700 cases
of past life memories
in children, where the
best explanation is really
of reincarnation.
The thing that is most
striking about their database
is that 35% of those
2,700 cases, the child
has a birthmark that
corresponds to the mortal wound
of the prior life.
Now, that is a mind
bender, when you
understand the implications.
Dr. Ian Stevenson
started that work,
Dr. Jim Tucker, a very
respected child psychiatrist
is carrying on that work.
He's the current
head of division
of perceptual studies at UVA.
But once you start
realizing that all
that reincarnation information
is real and scientifically
validated, it
becomes quite obvious
that you shouldn't be looking
for memory in the brain.
Neurosurgeons had
suspected for a long time
that memories are not
stored in the brain.
And the reason is,
even though you
can damage the medial
temporal lobes,
that seems to interfere with
the conversion of short-term
to long-term memories.
That's something that was
known by neurosurgeons back
in the early 1950s.
But in all the brain resections
we've done of the neocortex
by the millions over
the last century or so,
never has there been an
identifiable case of removal
of certain long-term memories.
That never happens.
Dr. Wilder Penfield, one of the
most respected neurosurgeons
in the 20th century who
worked out of Montreal,
wrote a book called "Mystery
of the Mind" in 1975.
And he is probably in a better
position than just about
anybody on Earth, because
he electrically stimulated
the brain in awake patients for
hundreds and hundreds of cases.
And mapping out the relationship
between the brain stimulation
and the phenomena
experienced by the mind.
And this book, "Mystery of
the Mind" makes it very clear,
you will not find the
mind in the brain.
It's too big.
There's too much going on.
You cannot explain it by
the workings of the brain.
He made it clear that
free will does not
exist in the brain itself.
Free will exists in
that higher realm
of consciousness and memory that
influences every bit of this.
>>LISA: So when this person, the
people, the subjects are awake
and they were able
to explain memories,
he did not see those synapses
happening in the brain?
>>EBEN: Well, what he found,
it's actually very complex.
And I go into some of that
in "Living in a Mindful
Universe," including the
first appendix in that book,
because it's fairly
complicated information.
First of all, he only
found that stimulation
over abnormal regions
of temporal lobe
would create any kind of
phenomenal experience.
You can't, for example,
parietal lobes,
where we think most
of sensory and what's
called association cortex,
where we put together
a model of the world--
well, you can stimulate
parietal lobe all day long,
and do not get those
kind of memories.
You only get them
over temporal lobe,
and only in abnormal regions.
You don't get them
in normal regions.
>>LISA: What are
abnormal regions?
>>EBEN: Meaning a part
that was, say, part
of the epileptic focus,
a place where somebody
had had a stroke
or a head trauma
or some damaged
area of the brain.
That's the only setting in
which he uncovered that.
Now, initially he thought he was
hot on the trail of uncovering
memory, because some of
those electrical stimulations
would trigger remote memories.
But it turns out
he came to realize
that even if he took that
part of the brain out,
he didn't get rid of the memory.
The patient could still
access the memory.
So in other words, it
was way too simplistic
a model that memory would
be stored in the brain.
And modern neurosurgical
research supports all that.
I did more than 100
such cases myself,
awake craniotomy
stimulating of the neocortex
to map out usually
speech or motor
areas, which can best be mapped
out in the awake patient.
It turns out, since the
brain feels no pain at all,
all you have to
do is anesthetize
the scalp with local anesthesia
and sedate the patient.
But then you can open
the skull and have
this huge open craniotomy
with the brain fully exposed,
and you can electrically
stimulate and have the patient
awake and talking with you.
>>LISA: What?
>>EBEN: They're
amazing experiences,
and I love doing those cases.
They're very instructive.
>>LISA: Did you do that
before or after your NDE?
>>EBEN: That was
all before my NDE.
>>LISA: Wow.
So you were always
really curious as a soul.
>>EBEN: I was very curious.
I wanted to know some answers.
But I didn't realize
how deep the mystery
was until my coma experience.
>>LISA: Well, the only
way you could have ever
gotten the answer was to go
through what you went through.
>>EBEN: Well, I had to.
And it caused me to
question everything
I'd ever thought I knew about
any part of the universe.
And that really is the
truth, is we have to go back
and question everything.
Because many of our
foundational beliefs,
including the primary assumption
of materialist science,
which is the physical world
is the only thing that exists,
and therefore if you
understand that physical world,
you can understand
everything else.
And that is false.
There's far more to this.
In fact, the odd irony of
it all is the physical world
is the part that doesn't exist.
There's old talk
about what's called
the ghost in the machine.
And the scientist
in me before coma
would have told you,
well, any discussion
of the ghost in the
machine, there is no ghost.
There's only the machine,
the physical brain.
And I would have
been dead wrong.
And this is where not
only modern neuroscience
and philosophy of mind are
going, but also quantum
physics and interpretation
of the measurement paradox.
They are converging
on this notion
that consciousness is
fundamental in the universe.
And that is the
revolution that is coming
to the scientific world
today, is the realization
that the thing that
exists is the ghost.
The machine is an
illusion created by mind.
And that is where it all
gets extremely fascinating.
>>LISA: So if you and
I are sitting here
and we're both observing
chairs and a rug and a table,
does that mean that the chairs
and the rug and the table
only exist because you
and I are observing them?
>>EBEN: Correct.
>>LISA: What about the
viewers observing them?
>>EBEN: Well, the
viewers are all at
ease of conscious awareness.
We're actually-- I
think the best way
to look at it is we
are sharing one mind.
We are all sharing one mind.
>>LISA: It's a group agreement.
>>EBEN: And it's really
kind of astonishing.
The fathers of quantum physics
saw this quite clearly.
Erwin Schrodinger, for example,
wrote a whole book on mind
and the notion of
one consciousness.
And one of my colleagues
and good friends
in this effort,
Dr. Larry Dossey,
wrote a beautiful
book called "The One
Mind," which is
absolutely about this,
how we are sharing one mind.
And it is pointed out through
things like telepathy.
And he started his
interest because he
has an identical twin brother.
And people who know
about twins realize
that sometimes, for example,
a twin can burn their finger
on a stove and their fellow
twin could be 1,000 miles away,
but they're the one who
developed the blister.
So you get these very strange
telepathic experiences
of shared mental
experience between twins.
Well, it turns out they
also exist between others.
Couples, romantic relationship,
parents and children,
can have very profound
telepathic communication.
My birth mother had a
profound knowing the night
that I went into coma.
And she had just gotten
back from a long vacation.
She had no way of knowing
it, but she was all alarmed
that something had happened.
And she ended up calling my
former spouse, what's going on?
And that's when she
heard that I had
gone into a deep coma that day
due to a profound bacterial
meningitis.
And she knew it.
So we have these
connections with others.
And so really mind is
far more than matter.
>>LISA: Yes, we do.
>>EBEN: And that can be
explained by the workings
of the physical brain.
And that's where
the modern study
of neuroscience and
consciousness and philosophy
of mind is so absolutely
amazing, because of what
it shows about human potential
about our interconnectedness,
how we're all really
in this together.
And that's why it's important
to treat each other as we
would like to be treated.
>>LISA: Yes.
And that we can also connect
with each other so easily.
I want you to take a look here
at Dr. Eben Alexander talking
about the difference between
consciousness and the brain.
>>EBEN: When we have to realize
that no human being has ever
witnessed anything
other than the inside
of their own consciousness.
It's something that my
co-author, Karen Newell, and I
call the supreme illusion.
And that is that everything
that is out there in the world,
when I have people
and have other--
you know, the trees, the birds,
the sky, the beautiful stars
and galaxies in the
night sky, all of that,
are our brain and
mind convinced us,
we're witnessing the out there.
But what we actually experience
is an internal construct.
And I cannot stress enough
the importance of realizing
the power and seduction
of that supreme illusion.
And to actually get
deeper to truth,
we have to kind of go
through that illusion.
And this is part of why
meditation is so important,
going into consciousness.
And really, you cannot think
your way to knowingness.
You cannot just read the
books and just watch the DVDs
and just go to the meetings.
The only way to actually
get it is to go within.
And that, of course, is why
Karen Newell and I will often
give these play shops,
as we call them,
using sacred acoustics tones.
The power differential
frequency sound to liberate
conscious awareness from the
illusion of the here and now
is very powerful.
>>LISA: OK.
So in this, you say that we
witness this supreme illusion.
What do you mean by
that, supreme illusion?
>>EBEN: Well, the supreme
illusion is just pointing out
the fact-- and it
is actually a fact,
it's not even kind
of a debatable issue.
And that is that when I am
sitting here experiencing
this and having this discussion
with you, just as when I go out
at night and look up at
the night stars and all
this beautiful universe we
live in, what I'm experiencing
is a model within mind.
Never, ever lose sight of that.
It turns out that
our brain and mind
are very clever at convincing
us that what we're experiencing
is out there.
But never has that
been the case.
It has always been that you
were experiencing a mental model
that we think has some fidelity
with what's going on out there.
And yet that's where there
are a number of different kind
of types of
hallucinations, experiments
you can do in psychology, to
show how much our mind fills
in the blanks and kind
of puts in these gaps
to kind of give us this reality.
Now, it's based on some
sensory information.
But in fact, when you get
into quantum physics, what
you come to realize with
the deepest study of quantum
physics--
and this is something that
was hinted at by the founding
fathers, like Schrodinger
and Wolfgang Pauli, John von
Neumann, Eugene
Wigner, and others.
And Erwin Schrodinger,
as I mentioned earlier--
>>LISA: The cat.
>>EBEN: Exactly,
Schrodinger and his cat--
they realized that
mind was fundamental,
that you cannot pretend that
somehow consciousness is
created by the physical
matter of the brain.
There's too much else going on.
Entanglement of
subatomic particles
is a great indicator of
the connection across space
and time of our knowledge
of this universe
and how the mental model is
what is putting it all together.
But it's not the result of
all these machinations out
in a physical world
that is simply being
observed by a physical brain.
The mind is actually
running the whole show.
>>LISA: What about pain?
Is pain something we make up?
>>EBEN: Pain is one of the
most beautiful examples
of how, how would you possibly
put together a material system
like the brain to make
it give you this thing
that we call pain that leads
to such behavioral changes?
Pain is one of those things
that has no easy explanation
whatsoever within the "brain
creates consciousness" model.
And yet with a broader
view, it starts
to make more sense
of how pain works.
And it's not just pain
in a physical sense,
but also the kind of
emotional pain and suffering
that comes with a lot
of our experiences
in life, like loss of
love and things like that.
There's a lot of that that
is very richly explained
by understanding the mental
nature of the universe
and of our very existence that
goes far beyond anything that
can be explained by
the physics, chemistry,
and biology of
subatomic particles
in the brain that
are interacting.
There's much more going on here.
And that's where I
think this revolution
in scientific understanding
of the mind-brain relationship
is so absolutely crucial and
important to this world today.
Materialist science gives
us this false notion
of separation, as if
we can do whatever
we want to others, because
we're separate from them.
But in reality,
as I said earlier,
quantum physics and
neuroscience of consciousness
are both leading to
the inevitable reality
that we're sharing one mind.
And all of this universe is
emerging from that one mind.
In fact, the life review that
is so common in near-death
experiences-- it's been
described going back at least
2,400 years across all
cultures and belief systems--
that life review is
a beautiful example
of how we're sharing one
mind because in your life
you don't experience
things as yourself.
You experience as those who
are affected by your choices
and actions around you.
And it's the evidence that the
golden rule, do unto others
as you would have
done unto yourself,
is written into the very
fabric of the universe.
Now, we reap what we sow.
So we need to be careful
how we treat others.
>>LISA: Let's talk about
that observer for a second.
You write about this in
"A Mindful Universe."
That observer, what does it
have to do with mindfulness?
>>EBEN: Well, very
important to point out.
Many of us would say our
mind and our consciousness
is that little stream of
consciousness in our head.
It's that little
running narrative.
Everyone has a
voice in their head.
>>LISA: It seems so small.
>>EBEN: Well, it is.
And it's the voice of your ego.
Now, it also happens
to be the voice
of rational, logical
discussion between human beings
about ideas.
But in essence,
don't start thinking
that is your consciousness.
The voice in your head--
I love how Michael Singer puts
it in his book, "The Untethered
Soul," he calls that voice
the annoying roommate.
And that's a very
important concept.
And Karen and I often get
into that in our meditation
workshops that we discuss in
"Living in a Mindful Universe,"
because what we're talking
about is the observer.
That's the part of
consciousness that
is so absolutely
mind-bending in every way
to the scientific world in
trying to understand how it can
work, is that observer self.
So your consciousness is
aware of that little voice.
And in meditation, the
very first thing I do
is I let that little voice maybe
state an intention or a quest
at the beginning of meditation.
But then it goes into timeout.
>>LISA: You give it a job.
>>EBEN: Because you're
not going to think
your way to the answers.
Our cognitive structures
are useful to some degree.
But there's a tremendous
amount of knowledge
that is not just dependent
on thinking your way there.
And that's where developing a
relationship with that observer
with that connection
to higher soul,
that observer is the same
part that expands tremendously
in a near-death experience when
your conscious awareness is
freed from the shackles
of the physical brain.
And that's what
near-death experiences
have been trying to tell
us for thousands of years.
That great expansion of
awareness, encountering souls
of departed loved ones,
that expansive sense
of that loving deity at
the core of all reality,
that God force that is so
beyond any kind of naming
or description, that's
the beauty of what
near-death experiences
bring back to the world.
But again, you don't have to
die or almost die to know this.
Meditation, centering prayer,
all of us as sentient beings,
can come to know these
truths by exploring
within our own consciousness,
which happens to be exploring
out into that primordial mind.
>>LISA: I get asked
that question a lot.
How do I have these experiences
without having to almost die?
And there are so many
incredible organizations now
where they allow you to
have out-of-body experiences
and transition you back in a
very safe, professional way.
There are shared
death experiences.
There are shared crossings.
The research is incredible
now, where you can actually
go into the death
experience with a loved one
and then assist then into
the afterworld, which
is the evidence of the stream
of consciousness never dying.
And that is some of
the most important ways
to live your life, is knowing
consciousness never dies.
>>EBEN: It's very crucial.
Now, of interest, there
is a very elaborate system
of what I call
programmed forgetting.
And that's why when
children, for example,
when Jim Tucker and others who
investigate past-life memories
and children suggestive
of reincarnation,
they realize that you need to
talk to children between ages 2
and 6, because that's when you
can harvest those memories.
As children age, there
are natural processes
that are part of this
programmed forgetting,
so that we don't remember
those things as an adult.
Now, that's not entirely
true because the whole world
of transpersonal
psychology, which
has grown up over the
last three decades
under the guidance of brilliant
investigators like Dr. Stan
Grof Dr. Brian Weiss,
Dr. Michael Newton--
they've done incredible
work to help us realize that
through hypnosis and
meditative techniques
that you can recover
past-life memories.
And in fact, I'd say
the greatest value
of the transpersonal
psychology world,
combined with the
research supporting
the scientific reality
of reincarnation,
is that it shows that
so many of the things
that we face in this life--
illness, injury, the
hardships and difficulties--
are actually something that our
higher souls and soul groups
selected for this lifetime.
And of course, most
people when you're
going through one of
those horrible hardships--
like when I was going through my
meningitis, when my family was
going through that, it's very
hard to see it as a blessing.
And yet, often the way these
turn out, the lessons learned,
are tremendous in
guiding our soul growth
and understanding of our
relationship with the universe.
The programmed forgetting
is important, though.
That's why the veiling function
of the brain is as it is--
that we don't have such
ready access to that.
If we came into these
lifetimes knowing fully
every bit of what our higher
souls know between lives
in planning these
incarnations, we
would kind of cheat the system.
>>LISA: The experience.
>>EBEN: Because
that's what gives us
skin in the game, the emotional
power, feeling the love,
but also feeling the pain of the
loss, when we lose a loved one,
a terminal diagnosis, all
these things that get so much
angst in our soul.
But that's why meditation,
centering prayer,
are beautiful gifts
because they help
to give us that
much bigger view,
to gain the bigger lessons
that our soul is here to learn.
>>LISA: So 2 to 6 makes
sense, because that is really
such a pure state.
And what happens to
the brain after that?
Why does the teenage
brain get this amnesia
of who they are until
we get to be adults
with our sense of purpose?
>>EBEN: Well, as I said earlier,
given that memories are not
even physically
stored in the brain,
it's important to realize that
what I believe is going on
there is a shift in
that realm of memory,
what you might call
the quantum hologram,
which is an information source
that we can all connect with.
But it's there for a purpose.
In other words, we're not meant
to come into these lives--
even though we have those
memories as children,
they connect us.
And for example,
children can play
with a departed grandparent
who they may have never known,
may not have even heard the name
of, and yet they'll be playing,
and they'll mention the
name, because they're really
playing with the soul of
that departed grandmother.
So children have
a very thin veil.
But there are processes.
For example, I mean,
children obviously
can remember what happened on
the big family vacation a week
ago when they're three and
four and five years old,
and they remember plenty well.
But there's some
process there that
makes it so that when
we hit age 6 and 7,
a lot of those memories
from before that time
are more difficult to access.
And that's kind of
a broad program that
also tends to cover up
those memories of past lives
and between lives.
>>LISA: So it's really meant
to be that way so you can
have the experiences of life?
>>EBEN: I think that's the--
from my point of view, it
kind of sets the stage.
Because when we had the great
higher wisdom of our highest
soul that we re-encounter at
the time of physical death
between incarnations, if
we knew every bit of that,
we wouldn't
necessarily be in here
on the stage setting, where
the drama is to unfold.
We're here to have that
emotional buy in and the power
of existing in these lives.
And most of us go
through life kind
of thinking that we're
living this incarnation,
and we're learning
the lessons of it.
And again, from my
journey, it was very clear
that the tough parts of life,
the hurdles and challenges,
are really gifts because they
are the engines of our souls'
growth.
And yet when you're
in the middle of it,
that's a very hard
thing to admit.
But often in looking
back over our lives,
we can realize how much we grew
through some of the toughest
challenges.
And that takes that
emotional buy in,
which involves that whole
programmed forgetting.
>>LISA: All right.
So what about those that don't
believe that there is a God
or that they get stuck in
that place of challenge
and they don't move forward
beyond thinking that there's
passion and purpose in life?
That's absolutely normal.
Let's take a look
here, actually,
at you talking with Larry King.
>>LARRY KING: You
believe in reincarnation.
How come there are
so many more people
on the planet now than were
on the planet 100 years ago?
>>EBEN: Turns out that
each and every one of us
has a lifeline that can
go into multiple different
incarnations.
We often reincarnate
with various soul groups.
But there is also a program--
a programmed forgetting so that
even though children can often
have past-life memories, they
disappear by about age 6.
It's a physiologic process.
>>LARRY: Why don't we have them?
Why can't I know my past?
>>EBEN: Well, I think part
of it is that we are here
to learn lessons that at this
stage of the game for humanity
are best learned if we
basically see ourselves
as physical beings
with one incarnation.
It gives us skin in the
game, the emotional power
of engagement, the loves,
the losses, every bit of it.
We need to be engaged with that.
But of course in
meditation, you can
learn to separate
and come to see
that the magic of
your consciousness
is not that little
voice in your head.
That's the annoying roommate.
Your consciousness
is the awareness.
And you can develop a
much richer awareness.
That's the part of
you that expands
when it's liberated
from the brain
at the time of physical death.
>>LARRY: I ask all the
time, what does it all mean?
I'm very literal.
I don't believe we go anywhere.
I'm not religious.
I don't think there's
a place upstairs.
Upstairs where?
I don't think
anyone's judging me.
I just don't buy it all.
I think religion is fine
for those who have it.
I think it's comforting.
But I can expand myself.
I can't do it.
You say death is temporary
and that I'm going somewhere.
Why am I wrong?
>>EBEN: Well,
actually the reason
the universe exists,
from my standpoint,
is what we're doing
right here now.
We're living these lives.
The point that I try and make
is that we can live these lives
better when we realize that
we're more than just one little
physical incarnation,
birth to death.
>>LARRY: So what I
believe doesn't matter?
It's gonna happen anyway?
>>EBEN: What you
believe matters a lot.
This universe is-- if
nothing else, it is just.
This is about learning.
It's about love and connection.
We are all really
sharing the one mind.
That's what near-death
experiencers come back
realizing.
No matter what your background,
the near-death experience
in most cases brings back
this incredible sense
of love and meaning of
purpose and connectedness.
It's all about relationships.
We're all in this together.
And it's not just about humans.
It's about all life on Earth.
But I tell you, fundamentally
it's about learning.
And the true answer to all
of the world's dark problems
is to recover love
for ourselves,
because each and
every one of us is
a divine connection
to the creative source
of the universe.
But also we're all
in it together.
So it really is about a
return to some principles
that I would say emerged
from the prophets of all
the great faiths, showing
compassion, kindness,
forgiveness, mercy--
we're really here to
take care of each other.
>>LARRY: You say
death is temporary.
>>EBEN: I would say
it's like breathing.
You breathe in here,
breathe out in death.
And then breathe in again
for another incarnation.
It's an oscillation.
But it's a progression.
It's not like-- in
some other traditions
there's this kind of
wheel of suffering
and that reincarnation is
a wheel that you escape.
I would say that's
not true at all.
This is about growth.
We're here to learn and grow.
The hardships in life
are actually gifts.
They are things that
give us the challenges.
And it's by recovering
love for self and love
for others, manifesting
that in all the choice
of our life, that enables that
soul growth that we're here
to do.
>>LISA: So Larry
talked about that
in the beginning of this clip
that he is atheistic and really
didn't believe in anything,
although he didn't call himself
an atheist.
How do you handle that when
you're talking about this?
>>LARRY: Well, I think
the important lesson
to learn, from my experience
and from many other near-death
experiences-- and
not just that, from
the tremendous modern
scientific literature
on the nature of consciousness.
And that includes not only
neuroscience and philosophy
of mind but parapsychology.
You can't make
sense of any of this
until you get deeply
into every bit of that.
But the thing that's
becoming very clear
is that one needs to
know the brain is not
the creator of consciousness
and the physical world is not
all that exists, and that our
conscious awareness actually
can experience many different
modes of a consensus reality.
And only one of them is tied
into this physical realm.
And so in essence, we find
that our conscious awareness
is far grander than just this
something that believes maybe I
just exist birth to death and
nothing more, ego-focused.
The ego is not who we are.
And that's the little
voice in the head
is often the voice of the ego.
And a lot of this discussion is
about expanding that observer
self, that deep mystery.
As I said, that's the part
that expands when you die.
And given the evidence from
all of these lines of research,
which we harp on in "Living
in a Mindful Universe"
and trying to bring
it all together,
generally the whole notion
that many different lines
of evidence in many different
fields, when they all converge,
it gives you very
strong evidence.
And so really, to the discerning
scientific intellectual mind
of the early 2000s,
the year 2018,
following the evidence, what
you expect is that when you die,
it's not the end
of your existence,
that your existence actually
expands tremendously.
And not only that, reincarnation
is absolutely real.
So we come back again and again.
That's based on the
scientific evidence.
I'm not talking about religious
scripture and belief systems.
I'm talking about following
the data about the nature
of consciousness.
And as the science
of consciousness
expands to fully incorporate
all the empirical data--
>>LISA: Yes, I can't wait.
>>EBEN: --and not
just be limited
by some simplistic and false
assumption, like physicalism,
that only the physical
exists, therefore
the brain must
create consciousness,
and there can be no afterlife.
If you're paying attention to
the scientific data and study,
what you expect is that
your consciousness goes
through many different
lifetimes, all
in a process of
ascendance, I might add.
Reincarnation in this
setting is not just,
as some religious
systems would put,
a mechanistic wheel of suffering
that you're trying to get off,
because all of it is directed
towards learning, teaching,
becoming, expressing love,
compassion, kindness,
forgiveness, realizing we
are all in this together,
sharing that one mind.
It's a tremendous
lesson for humanity.
And it's based absolutely
in modern quantum physics
and modern study of brain,
mind, and consciousness,
and the nature of reality.
>>LISA: And that's what you
put together in the book.
I can't wait to see this field
of research 50 years from now,
60 years from now, where
this is common knowledge.
I can really envision
that happening.
But first I want you to
take a look at this clip,
because it really shows
the after-death experience
and the existence
of consciousness
before and after life.
Take a look at this.
>>EBEN: But if you study
the literature, it's there.
Now, one beautiful case that
I'll only go into very briefly,
but there is a book about, it's
called "The Sole Survivor."
And I highly
recommend this book.
It's been heavily studied
by Jim Tucker, who's
the current head of DOPS, and
by other people, scientists
who are very interested in
these reincarnation stories.
And in this one
particular story,
this little boy James Leininger,
at about age 2 and 1/2,
started having nightmares
where he would say,
plane on fire, little
man can't get out.
And then he started talking--
when his parents would ask him
about these nightmares night
after night after night,
he would say, well,
I was in a plane and was
shot by the Japanese.
Now, this is a 2 and 1/2 year
old boy maybe 10 years ago
who really didn't know anything
about that history of World War
II, but he said his plane
was shot in the engine.
And then one of his good
friends, Jack Larson,
was there.
Not only that, when he
had three GI Joe dolls
that he had at age
three, he named them
Billy, Leon, and Walter.
And he told his parents when
they asked about the names,
he told them that those were the
names of three of his friends
who had gone to
heaven before him,
back when he was shot
down by the Japanese.
Well, when the parents started
doing a little homework
and they heard their
little boy talking
about flying off the Natoma.
Now, this boy had no
idea that airplanes
could fly off of boats.
But he said, I flew off
the Natoma in a Corsair.
This is all information that
he had no way of knowing.
And so it turns out--
and I promise you,
there's so much
more to this story.
It's just an incredible--
so read "The Sole Survivor"
if you want to learn more.
But it turns out that the
more homework they did,
they ended up finding
out that there
was a ship called Natoma Bay.
It was a Casablanca-class
escort carrier
in the Pacific involved
in the battle of Iwo Jima.
And what they did
is in researching
that, they went to one
of the reunions of some
of those pilots, and they met
Jack Larson, the very same man
who was wonderful friends with
this boy in the previous life.
And it turns out that the three
names of those GI Joe dolls
were the three other
pilots who were
killed before he was killed.
>>LISA: So this was an
incredible experience,
where he was able to see the
GI Joes of the pilots that
were killed, and it's
just fascinating.
But I want you to explain
some of the hard science,
other than just the recounting
of people that you interview
and that we hear stories from.
What is some of the hard
science of the existence
of consciousness?
How do they prove it?
>>EBEN: Well, some
of the-- for example
I think what you're
looking for is the evidence
that the brain does not
create consciousness.
That evidence is very strong
in the neuroscience world
through examples of,
say, terminal lucidity.
Often it's estimated in
somewhere between 5% and 10%
of Alzheimer's
patients, for example,
that as they go through
progressive dementia,
as their brain is more and more
impaired over weeks and months
and even years, to the point
where they might have gotten
reduced to completely unable
to say a word or phrase,
completely detached from this
world and seemingly almost
zombie like, what often happens
in those cases of terminal
lucidity is they
approach death--
and statistically it's usually
within a week of death--
they come back to life.
They all of a sudden just
wake right back in a way that
conventional neuroscience,
believing brain creates
consciousness, cannot
possibly explain.
And they come back richly
interactive with loved ones
at the bedside, often
when they witness
souls of departed loved ones
coming to escort them across.
>>LISA: I had this
firsthand experience.
My husband's
grandmother was passing.
They brought her home.
I remember specifically
sitting on a couch with her.
And she had cancer.
But yet she came alive, and
she was hearing this harmonic
sound of bells and music.
And then she was talking
with her husband, who
had passed before and
lots of other friends.
And she came alive fully.
But I was wondering if
she was hallucinating.
>>EBEN: No.
>>LISA: How do you know?
>>EBEN: It's often called--
well, the cases that
are most striking
are the ones where the
patient has not uttered
a meaningful phrase for months.
>>LISA: Right.
And that was the case.
>>EBEN: And you see those.
And that is a true
mind-blowing terminal lucidity.
They're not uncommon.
In fact, a hospice worker
I talked with in England
a few months ago told me
she sees it 98% of the time.
I think it depends--
>>LISA: I believe that.
>>EBEN: --a bit on
your definition.
It depends a bit on
how awake and alert
you are to these kind of things.
But terminal lucidity
is a perfect example
of how the brain is not the
creator of consciousness.
Another example would be
acquired savant syndromes.
These are where something
like head injury, a stroke,
some kind of brain
damage unleashes
a superhuman mental capacity.
Say, the ability to
look at a telephone
book, one page per second,
go through 50,000 names
and numbers over 20 seconds,
and then be able to answer.
You know, John Smith,
what is his phone number?
Oh, and pop it out.
And they couldn't do that
before the brain injury.
And I had one
patient, for example,
who was hit in the
head with a baseball,
had an epidural
hematoma, went to coma.
Luckily we got it out quickly.
He had a very nice recovery.
But it his second
follow-up visit, he
said, doc, I can do something
I couldn't do before.
Maybe you can explain it.
He asked me if I had
a map, and I did.
I pulled one down,
showed it to him.
And he looked at it
for about five seconds
and then asked me
to put it away.
And then he started drawing.
From the center outward, he
drew this perfect picture
of that map from memory.
He says, I could
not do that before.
>>LISA: What happened?
What did happen?
>>EBEN: Well, he got hit in
the head with a baseball,
but I don't know.
It obviously did something.
These cases of acquired
savant syndromes
are really stunning-- prodigious
memory, prodigious abilities
of calculation, and all that
can come from brain damage.
So mind is not
created by the brain.
Now, a third category that we go
into in great detail in "Living
in a Mindful
Universe" are a series
of recent scientific
studies looking at patients
under the influence of very
powerful psychedelic drugs--
serotonin 2A receptor drugs,
such as psilocybin, LSD, DMT,
dimethyl tryptamine, which
is the active principle
in ayahuasca.
And it turns out that those
scientific studies using
FMRI, functional
MRI, are sometimes
magneto encephalography to
look at workings in the brain,
came to a startling conclusion.
And that is the most
profound experiences
that people have under the
influence of those drugs
are associated with the
greatest shutting down
of the physical
activity in the brain.
It's a complete and
absolute opposite
of what conventional
neuroscientists, who
believe brain creates
consciousness,
would have postulated.
And this is something we go
into in great detail in "Living
in a Mindful Universe,"
because those studies are
very important.
Now, I'm not
recommending to anyone
to go out and use those drugs.
I think that it's very
important to use them
in a scientific setting.
They're helping us under
a lot about consciousness.
Psilocybin, in
particular, is probably
going to be of tremendous value
in alleviating fear of death
in cancer patients, in helping
people get over addiction
to things like nicotine,
heroin, other drugs.
These psychedelic drugs in
a proper clinical setting
can be very powerful.
But from a research
standpoint, they basically
support exactly what I saw
in my experience, which
is this incredible
dismantling of my neocortex
through bacterial
meningoencephalitis,
opened up this
rich ultra-reality,
far beyond anything I had ever
experienced in this world,
just like it's occurring
in those patients
on the psychedelic
drugs where you
show the shutdown of all
those physical mechanisms
in the brain.
And that's what allows
this incredibly robust
psychic experience.
>>LISA: I asked that
over and over again.
Was it just that my conscious
mind was just knocked offline,
and that's why I
had this experience
of expansive connectivity?
Or did I actually go
to another dimension?
Or was it just
pure consciousness?
And the answer is,
yes, all of the above.
But my important point
about the psychedelics
is I believe personally that
you can get to that same state
through deep
transcendental meditation.
I believe that you
don't necessarily
need the psychoactives.
And if you get into
the right environment,
you can connect with the field
of people who are studied
or know how to do
this that can really
get to that place of purpose.
And I actually think that
this is very important.
It's life saving.
You don't necessarily need
to do psychoactive drugs
to find your purpose in life.
You can really connect to your
bigger why and your bigger
reason for everything
that will cause
you to want to live--
beyond addiction,
beyond suicide, beyond
trauma, beyond anything.
I think it's personally
a possibility.
>>EBEN: I would
agree with you 100%.
And that's something
else that we talk about
in "Living in a
Mindful Universe."
It has to do with meditation
and centering prayer
being beautiful ways to
get us all to that space.
And of course, we
talk in the book
about using sacred
acoustics tones,
about differential
frequency brain entrainment.
It turns out Chris
Christopher Bache--
B-A-C-H-E-- wrote a beautiful
book called "Dark Night,
Early Dawn."
And he did a lot of
personal investigation years
ago using LSD for something
more than 60 actual experiences
over several decades.
>>LISA: Personally?
>>EBEN: And he did personally.
But he also had a tremendous
amount of experience
with other people using
drugs, and he was deeply
into the religious and
spiritual aspects of this.
And in the book, "Dark
Night, Early Dawn,"
he makes a beautiful case that,
in fact, differential frequency
brain entrainment,
through sound,
just like what is used
in sacred acoustics--
but he was used to a
much earlier form of it,
a form of hemi-sync
brain entrainment
that was big in
the '80s and '90s.
But he concludes that the sound
actually takes you further
than the psychedelic drugs.
And what I would add is it gives
you a more stable environment.
I think the drugs create
too much of a splash,
and it's sometimes
very difficult--
>>LISA: Too much.
>>EBEN: --to glean the lessons.
But if you have a dedicated
practice of going within.
I meditate an hour or two a day.
If you can take 10
or 20 minutes a day,
that's a beautiful start.
But going within,
especially if you
have a technique that
helps you to silence
that little voice of anxiety,
the voice of the ego,
but to develop that
observer within, that richer
sense of connection to
your higher soul, all of us
can come to know,
as you just said,
that rich reality of soul,
the reason and purpose
for our existence, how the
hardships and difficulties
are gifts, they're
stepping stones
to help us along the way,
to help us to grow much more
fully into the human spirit and
soul that we came to this world
to be.
>>LISA: I think
that's very important.
Now, did he measure
it with a brain scan?
How did he tell the difference
between the acoustics?
>>EBEN: You really
have to read the book.
It's through
incredible analyses.
He's a very thoughtful
scientist studying all this.
>>LISA: So it's possible.
I mean, of course it's possible
to reach different access
areas of your brain that
are not normally online.
Now, I have a question for you
in terms of your meditations
and what you access.
And what do you see, Eben,
as the future of science?
Where are we going with this?
>>EBEN: Well, I think
the future is wide open.
In fact, I often think that we
cannot even begin to glimpse
the future that all of this is
leading to, this revolution.
It's really a revolution in
thinking that in many ways
I believe will make the
Copernican revolution 400
years ago, when we came to
move the center of the universe
from the Earth to the sun--
I think it will make
that revolution look
relatively minor by comparison.
This is a tremendous shift.
And it's an incredible
recoil against the--
the message from
materialist science
has been progressively
to show humanity
is kind of a chemical accident
on a little speck of dust
orbiting an average star
in a very average galaxy
off in a distant
corner of the universe.
And this new thinking actually
kind of shifts the focus
to realizing that the
fact that we have mind
and we have consciousness
and can actually reflect
on this universe-- and
especially when we come
to realize we're really sharing
one mind, in many ways for me,
it calls back the writings
of Teilhard de Chardin,
back in the mid
20th century, a book
called "The Phenomenon of
Man," where he basically
kind of shifted things about
our notion of evolution.
And from kind of the minimal
notions of Darwinian evolutions
to biological
systems on Earth, he
expanded it tremendously to an
understanding of an evolution
of all of consciousness.
And that's what I believe
we are all participating in.
And that is why this
awakening is so important.
And it's also important because
it will rescue humanity.
We had a divorce
in the 20th century
mainly from science, from
technology and science,
divorced from human spirit.
And that's how
come, for example,
chemists committed their
sins in World War I
with high explosives and machine
guns and poisonous gases.
>>LISA: And separatism.
>>EBEN: Physicists
committed their sin
in World War II with the
development of nuclear weapons.
And one thing I'm sure of is if
we ever have a World War III,
World War IV will be fought
with sticks and stones.
So obviously our
humanity needs rescuing
from our own kind of insanity.
And that divorce was because
the materialist mindset
of materialist science tried to
put spirit, kind of human soul,
out of the picture.
And it's not.
That's unnatural.
And in fact science is now
putting consciousness, mind,
spirit, right back at the
core of all of reality.
And it's time for this
reconciliation between science
and spirituality.
It's crucial for our ongoing
success as a species.
>>LISA: Yes.
Is that what you think
you're here to do, Eben?
I ask all of my guests, what
is the biggest, biggest why
as to why you do all you do?
>>EBEN: Well, I do
what I do because I
had an extraordinary experience
that completely shifted
my understanding of the nature
of brain-mind consciousness,
and in ways that
I've come to realize
are important for
other people to know.
When I came back to this world,
I had no idea of all that.
There was no sense
of any giant mission.
I actually came
back to this world
because I sensed the presence
of the soul of my youngest
son, Bond, who as I describe in
"Proof of Heaven," at that time
he was 10 years old,
that was Sunday morning,
it was day seven of coma, he
had just overheard the doctors
telling my family it was
time to give up hope and stop
the medication, stop the
antibiotics, and let me go.
Even though they protected
him from the worst news
during that week, he came
running down the hallway,
pulled open my eyelids--
I'm on the ventilator-- one
eye looking this way, the other
down there, and my
pupils were fixed.
And anybody who knows
anything about neuroscience
knows that's a horrible picture.
And I did not see him with my
eyes or hear him with my ears,
but across the vast distances
separating that spiritual realm
from this realm--
although they're
not vast at all,
it's all right here, but it
seemed vast at that time--
and his presence was
there pleading with me,
Daddy, you're going to be OK,
Daddy, you're going to be OK.
I didn't understand the words.
But there was some
connection even though I
didn't know who he was.
I realize now that I had
to come back to this realm.
I had no idea what
this realm was,
and yet I knew I had to
go there to be for him.
He needed me.
And it was that love, that
incredible bridge of love,
that was the reason I
came back to this world.
>>LISA: That's what it's all
about is that love, absolutely.
>>EBEN: That is so true.
And as I said in
"Proof of Heaven," that
was the deepest scientific
truth of my whole journey,
is that love is
the binding force.
And people might say, well,
that's not very scientific.
Well, I'll tell you what.
Where I've been,
it is absolutely
at the core of the science.
You can't make
sense of any of this
without understanding
that power of love.
>>LISA: The future of
science is when we determine
what love is scientifically.
>>EBEN: Well, as
Teilhard de Chardin said,
when man really discovers
the deepest truth of love
and the binding force of
it and how it's written
into the fabric
of the universe--
I'm paraphrasing
him-- but he said,
man will then have discovered
fire for the second time.
Beautiful quote.
>>LISA: It's that big.
>>EBEN: It's
absolutely that big.
>>LISA: It's that life-saving--
>>EBEN: And it's a
scientific truth.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
Yes, it is.
You are no longer practicing
as a neuroscientist, correct?
Or as a surgeon.
>>EBEN: You can't do
neurosurgery part time.
So as much as I did
not like leaving
behind the beautiful
world of neurosurgery
because I adored my
career in neurosurgery--
there's nothing better
than helping people,
especially people who are
really in dire straits,
and I love that.
I still hear from a
lot of my patients,
and it was a beautiful
part of my experience.
But I couldn't
continue to do justice
to those patients when I was
so busy with all the writing
and lectures and all that
are involved in this.
>>LISA: And we appreciate this.
We appreciate what
you're doing now.
Thank you so much for
helping us understand
the difference between
brain, mind, consciousness,
and oneness.
Thank you so much.
Dr. Eben Alexander
has been my guest.
And if you'd like to watch
other shows with Dr. Alexander,
you can check them
out on Gaia TV.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.